Greetings and salutations. This is a text I need to translate.



Savers have had to navigate a shifting rate environment over the last couple of years, but one thing hasn't changed: There are still opportunities to earn attractive returns on money that might otherwise sit in a low-rate deposit account. And while today's top savings rates aren't quite as high as they were at their recent peaks, some certificate of deposit (CD) accounts are still paying rates that are well above average.

That can make shorter-term CDs particularly appealing right now. With a 9-month CD, for example, you don't have to commit your money for multiple years to secure a competitive fixed interest rate. You'll know exactly what rate you're earning during the CD term, and your money will become available again in less than a year, giving you an opportunity to reassess your options relatively quickly.


How much interest can a $10,000 9-month CD earn right now?

What you earn on a 9-month CD depends largely on the annual percentage yield (APY) you're able to secure. Right now, some of the more competitive 9-month CDs have rates of 4.00% or higher, making it possible to generate a few hundred dollars in interest on a $10,000 deposit without taking on the risks associated with market-based investments.

Assuming the CD compounds according to its stated APY and you leave the full $10,000 deposited for nine months, here's what you could earn at three competitive rates:

    $10,000 in a 9-month CD at 4.40%: About $328.22 in interest, for a total balance of roughly $10,328.22
    $10,000 in a 9-month CD at 4.10%: About $305.95 in interest, for a total balance of roughly $10,305.95
    $10,000 in a 9-month CD at 4.00%: About $298.52 in interest, for a total balance of roughly $10,298.52


I love a good Key lime pie, but there’s a reason why this bright and zingy lemon pie got its name. In addition to how it comes together, every bite of this creamy, tangy pie is pure magic. If you need a nostalgic dessert for your summer BBQ or potluck, then this classic pie won’t let you down.

What is magic lemon pie?
This classic lemon pie gets its “magic” from the way the filling sets up. The filling turns into a custard just by whisking the ingredients together, thanks to the acid from the freshly squeezed lemon juice reacting with the sweetened condensed milk. It might not be a no-bake recipe, but baking the crust and the entire pie results in an incredible texture and richer flavor. See—magic!

How to make magic lemon pie:
My version of magic lemon pie calls for an extra-buttery graham cracker crust that’s first partially baked before the filling is poured in. Why bake the crust? I found that pre-baking the crust gives the pie a jumpstart on caramelization—and caramelization is a very good thing. Once cooled and the filling is added, a second bake helps stabilize the pie along with ensuring the yolks are fully cooked.


 Momofuku founder and chef David Chang shares a recipe for barbecue pulled-pork sandwiches that boasts a remarkably short ingredient list. The result is impressive, balancing the sweetness of molasses and brown sugar; the tang of ketchup and vinegar; and the depth of warm spices, tomato paste, and ground coffee. The technique is simple and hands-off, too: You’ll season the pork shoulder and brown it all over in a Dutch oven, then add it back in for an hours-long braise, letting all the fat in the pork shoulder render and the collagen break down. The result is flavorful, juicy, and easy to shred.
The magic of molasses

While most common in sweet baked goods, molasses also shows up often in pulled-pork recipes. It’s a byproduct of the cane sugar-making process, which makes it less sweet than refined sugar. Indeed, molasses has a complex, slightly bitter, and smoky sweetness that complements barbecued meats. It lends nuance, helps develop a deeper color, and gives this recipe its deliciously sticky finish.
Notes from the Food & Wine Test Kitchen

    Make sure to let the pork rest before shredding so it stays juicy and is easier to pull apart.
    Browning the pork well at the start builds essential flavor — don’t rush this step.


To use it, you first need to bloom the gelatin in a little bit of cold water. This process dissolves the gelatin, ensuring there are no lumps in your final product. (Simply adding the gelatin to warm liquid is a recipe for disaster.) Because the filling is made in the mixer, you’ll bloom the gelatin directly in the mixer bowl for one less dish to clean.

Once bloomed, the gelatin will firm up into a puck-like texture—like a scoby that sits atop kombucha—and before you proceed, you’ll need to re-melt it. In my recipe, I simply heat up a small portion of the heavy cream and pour it over the bloomed gelatin, allowing it to remelt before adding the rest of the cheesecake ingredients. The filling sets in the fridge for at least four hours, but preferably overnight. The resulting texture—soft yet sliceable—is magic.

Because you’ll only need one packet of gelatin for this recipe, you’ll be left with three packets to play around with. (Knox brand, the most common brand of gelatin sold in grocery stores, comes with four packets.) Might I suggest making my tiramisu panna cotta, or my homemade marshmallow recipe?

As always, save and then make the karpatka, and let us know how it went in the recipe comment section or in the club chat on Substack. Or if you made something else with gelatin, let us know, too! I’m here for it all.

These muffins remove the pesky aspects of baking with kids without losing any of the joy. The batter is made entirely in a food processor, so you don’t have to worry about the delayed gratification of tempering butter or the potential burns that come with using the melted kind. There are plenty of opportunities to press buttons! The food processor also lets you skip processed sugar. This recipe uses dates instead, creaming them into the butter in the first step. You can let your kids go nuts decorating the tops with whatever they like (our favorite is blueberries) before sliding them into the oven. The resulting muffins are just sweet enough to qualify as a treat, and they're lovely enough for grown-ups, too. If you don’t have a food processor, finely chop the dates and have your kid smush them with a pestle and mortar before beating them into the butter by hand.

MILAN (AP) — As Italy has been plunged into a period of extreme heat, social media accounts amplified and falsified reports about the impact on the production of Parmigiano Reggiano cheese and a regional bank that stores the cheese wheels as collateral for loans.

Parmigiano Reggiano cheese is made according to strict specifications within defined geographic areas in the Emilia Romagna region of northern Italy. Milk comes from dairy cattle fed only on locally grown forage, and the wheels must be aged for a minimum of 12 months, and can continue to 24, 36 or 40 months.

To help producers manage their capital, a handful of banks accept the cheese wheels as collateral on loans during the aging process — the largest of which is the Credito Emiliano S.p.A’s Magazini Generali delle Tagliate (MGT), which has been operating since 1953.

Social media claimed that the extreme heat that swept Italy threatened both the cheese and its main cheese bank.

Here’s a closer look at the facts.

 At 100 years old (yes, really!), my grandmother has strong, steadfast opinions on food. Or, as she puts it, “I like what I like.” She’s quite picky, and she prefers to cook for herself, so when my grandma gives a store-bought product her ringing endorsement, you know it’s good. Because even grandmas aren’t above store-bought shortcuts—and she’s been buying this heat-and-eat side dish for as long as I can remember. Here’s why you should give her favorite brand of premade creamed spinach a try ASAP.
My Grandma’s Go-to Heat-And-Eat Side

My grandma’s been buying the Peter Luger Creamed Spinach in the refrigerator section of her local grocery store, and all but swears by the stuff. Why? Because it’s a fancy steakhouse-quality dish with the convenience of a heat-and-eat product.

If you don’t know Peter Luger, it’s a steakhouse in New York that dates back to 1887 and is still one of the most sought-after tables to this day. Lucky for you and me, if you can’t nab a table (or don’t live near New York), Peter Luger ships its steaks nationally, but (even more exciting for me) the restaurant also has several products in grocery stores.

Peter Luger’s steak sauce is a staple in my family’s pantry, and its thick-cut bacon is the ideal splurge for a special Sunday brunch. But the creamed spinach is what my family reaches for time and time again. It’s decadent and rich, and though it is a bit of a splurge (typically $7-$10, depending on the store), it’s worth it if you think of how much time you save (and how much spinach cooks down!).

This grab-and-go creamed spinach goes from fridge to table in minutes, and instantly elevates any meal to a restaurant-level dish. It would be more than welcome on any holiday table alongside baked ham or prime rib, and could easily pass for homemade (if you hide the packaging quickly enough). 

If you’re looking for a natural solution to keep bugs away, you may have heard that you can grow certain plants to repel mosquitoes—it’s not quite that simple. Some plants do release chemicals to protect themselves, but simply growing them won’t keep mosquitoes out of your yard.

“Plants create compounds that are toxic or taste bad so that they’re not eaten by insects,” says entomologist Joel Coats, PhD, Charles F. Curtiss Distinguished Professor Emeritus at Iowa State University. “But plants invest too much energy to deploy these compounds all the time.”

That means the plants aren’t releasing the chemicals around the clock like some sort of invisible shield. In a nutshell, “there’s no evidence that placing certain plants around your patio or garden will repel anything,” says Coats, who has researched natural insect repellents for more than two decades.

        “There’s no evidence that placing certain plants around your patio or garden will repel anything.”

Some research has found that the oils from certain plants have repellent properties. However, most studies looked at plant extracts, not at the plants themselves.

“These extracts are made by crushing and distilling specific plant parts such as stems, leaves, and bark,” says Elmer Gray, entomologist and researcher at the University of Georgia. “The available research does not support the premise that plants emit these aromatic oils in their natural state without being processed.”

If you’re looking for a natural solution to keep bugs away, you may have heard that you can grow certain plants to repel mosquitoes—it’s not quite that simple. Some plants do release chemicals to protect themselves, but simply growing them won’t keep mosquitoes out of your yard.

“Plants create compounds that are toxic or taste bad so that they’re not eaten by insects,” says entomologist Joel Coats, PhD, Charles F. Curtiss Distinguished Professor Emeritus at Iowa State University. “But plants invest too much energy to deploy these compounds all the time.”

That means the plants aren’t releasing the chemicals around the clock like some sort of invisible shield. In a nutshell, “there’s no evidence that placing certain plants around your patio or garden will repel anything,” says Coats, who has researched natural insect repellents for more than two decades.

        “There’s no evidence that placing certain plants around your patio or garden will repel anything.”

Some research has found that the oils from certain plants have repellent properties. However, most studies looked at plant extracts, not at the plants themselves.

“These extracts are made by crushing and distilling specific plant parts such as stems, leaves, and bark,” says Elmer Gray, entomologist and researcher at the University of Georgia. “The available research does not support the premise that plants emit these aromatic oils in their natural state without being processed.”
