corn that is popped


First, cut the stem off of the bell pepper. 
Next, lay the bell pepper upside down, with the stem end lying flat on the cutting board. 
Then, use a chef’s knife to cut the bell pepper into three parts, cutting through the grooves that are in between the rounded ends of the pepper (the cut should somewhat resemble the shape of the letter “Y”).
Lastly, pull each of the pieces apart and away from the stem end. This results in seed-free pieces, perfect for slicing, chopping, and dicing. The stem end holds all of the seeds in place. 


 1. Heat up Food and Keep It Warm

Around the holidays, you probably run out of oven space, thanks to the turkey, pie, and lasagna. Keep other foods toasty warm by placing trays in the dishwasher and running a drying cycle. Remember, no water!
2. Wash Baseball Hats

“Whether they’re worn every day or only on game day, hats can quickly become sweaty, stinky, and greasy,” Molly Maid, a house cleaning service, told Allrecipes. “To avoid bending them in the washing machine, toss them on the top rack of the dishwasher and run a cold cycle.”

The cleaning company recommends a mixture of baking soda and vinegar as a safe and gentle way to clean and deodorize your trusty baseball cap in the dishwasher. But don’t run the drying cycle. Instead, let the caps air-dry on the kitchen counter.
3. Freshen up Flip-Flops

Flip-flops are go-to footwear in warm weather, but they can get dirty, sandy, smelly, and sticky after continued wear during the summer months. “Hook them on a rack, and run a cold cycle—use the baking soda and vinegar mixture here, too—and they will be clean in no time,” Molly Maid said. Also, rain boots, water shoes, Crocs, and even canvas sneakers with rubber soles can be safely washed in the dishwasher. Opt for air-drying to avoid shrinkage.
4. Wash the Microwave Plate

The base plate in the microwave gets a lot of use and is a victim of spills and splatters that can quickly harden and stink up the quick-cooking kitchen appliance. “Next time you load your dishwasher, place the microwave plate on the bottom rack with your other plates and bowls,” Molly Maid said. “Get in the habit of doing this once a week.”
5. Get Grime off Garden Tools

Do you have a green thumb, with a bountiful veggie garden in the backyard? If you’re growing tomatoes and cucumbers and pruning roses, then your garden tools are definitely dirty. “Hand tools with plastic, ceramic, or rubber handles can get a much-needed wash in the dishwasher,” according to Molly Maid. “Dishwasher soap is fine to use in this case.” 


 Many years ago, when I was a vegetarian, I ate many, many veggie burgers. It was one of the few non-meat options I could count on at restaurants, and unfortunately, many of them were bland, soggy, and decidedly not delicious. Thankfully, plant-based food has come a long way since—and today, grocery stores carry plenty of fantastic options. Gone are the sad, flabby patties of yore, and in their place are hearty burgers made with grains, legumes, vegetables, soy and pea protein, mushrooms, and more. In fact, there are so many options that we split up our taste test into three categories: classic veggie burgers, black bean burgers, and all the other burgers that didn’t fit into either category. 

To find the best veggie burgers, we tasted 31 varieties across all three categories you’re likely to find at your local grocery store. We prepared each on a griddle according to package directions, then sampled each without knowing which was which. After making our way through all the burgers, we found five overall winners that we’d happily serve at a cookout or prepare for an easy weeknight meal. We’re sharing those winners below—but if you’d like to read more about the individual taste tests and the criteria for each category, feel free to visit the links. 
