
Hello! How are you doing? Please translate this text below, it is about the concept known as "jerk" in Jamaican cuisine. Thanks!

Turn your TV into a slideshow or media player

Most new TV models come with a pair of USB 2.0 ports, and often a 3.0 port for faster data transfer. Your TV screen is likely bigger than your computer monitor, so why not use it to carousel a gallery of images or play videos? 

I attended a family gathering recently, and the host used a 65-inch TV to do that very thing. The scanned pictures and videos looked and sounded great -- all accessed by simply plugging in a USB flash drive. 

Just about any type of external hard drive, thumb drive, or data stick will function as if you plugged it into a laptop. Your TV will immediately recognize a connected device and offer you a means for accessing and navigating your media files.

Also: Looking for Netflix shows? I used these secret codes to unlock the full catalog

A larger display allows for more space to multitask, work on complex designs, and view your discombobulating number of open windows simultaneously. You'll need those peripheral tools to be connected by USB to get the work done.

A final line of text goes here. and now for the linguist assignments.

Let's see how it works minus due dates.

Ok, here's another line of text.

This is a brand new test with one last, final line of text. TESTING!

Most new TV models come with a pair of USB 2.0 ports, and often a 3.0 port for faster data transfer. Your TV screen is likely bigger than your computer monitors, so why not use it to carousel a gallery of images or play videosgames? 

The term, as critics love to point out, is not universally defined, and not all processed foods are equally bad for you. Still, it describes about three-quarters of the American food supply. While it refers broadly to any food made mostly of industrial ingredients that themselves are already highly processed (think pea protein isolate or methylcellulose), some like to define it as foods made with ingredients you wouldn’t find in a home kitchen. I tend to subscribe to a theory articulated by Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart in 1964 about obscenity: “I know it when I see it.”

The term, as critics love to point out, is not universally defined, and not all processed foods are equally bad for you. Still, it describes about three-quarters of the American food supply. While it refers broadly to any food made mostly of industrial ingredients that themselves are already highly processed (think pea protein isolate or methylcellulose), some like to define it as foods made with ingredients you wouldn’t find in a home kitchen. I tend to subscribe to a theory articulated by Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart in 1964 about obscenity: “I know it when I see it.”

The term, as critics love to point out, is not universally defined, and not all processed foods are equally bad for you. Still, it describes about three-quarters of the American food supply. While it refers broadly to any food made mostly of industrial ingredients that themselves are already highly processed (think pea protein isolate or methylcellulose), some like to define it as foods made with ingredients you wouldn’t find in a home kitchen. I tend to subscribe to a theory articulated by Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart in 1964 about obscenity: “I know it when I see it.”
