Hi!

This is an updated version of a file that will be translated. This will now be version 4.

Thanks, and best regards!

The below is an introduction to the "Bloomin' Onion" from Outback Steakhouse. Please read on:

When Ryan Nanni put on the singularly iconic — and utterly ridiculous — Bloomin’ Onion costume for the 2018 Outback Bowl, all he could think about was how uncomfortable he was and how utterly absurd the journey had been up until this point.

In the last year or so, I’ve walked by snaking lines for jerk pizza, stood in a queue for a sold-out jerk chicken salad sandwich on coco bread from a popup by baker Bryan Ford, and watched viral videos of the rapper Rubi Rose assisting in the construction of a bodega jerk chopped cheese. It’s all made me wonder: What can’t jerk do? And how did this specific set of flavors become such a common cultural shorthand for Caribbean cuisine?

“While it’s specifically Jamaican,” Mitchell writes, “jerk is an incredible example of the complexity and ingenuity of Caribbean cuisine in general, and of how the food is so richly expressive of the people.”

In the 17th century, as the British pried Jamaica away from Spanish colonists, many people who had been enslaved by the Spanish escaped into the Jamaican mountains to establish free communities of Maroons. The Maroons adapted some of the cooking techniques that had kept the indigenous Taíno people safe from the violence of the Spanish. This included smoking meat (such as wild boar) underground with pimento wood smoke so that the fires couldn’t be detected by colonists. Today the pimento flavor is often introduced by pimento berries (also known as allspice) in the marinade for the meat.

As London Chase, the chef at Brooklyn’s recently opened Mango Bay, points out, the salt and smoke of jerk has also been a resourceful way of prolonging ingredients’ shelf life throughout history. “We actually used it back in the day just to ferment and preserve certain types of food,” he says. “You could basically jerk and pickle anything.” 

Growing up in French Guiana, Chase remembers using jerk sauce to ferment fruits and vegetables, turning grated mango into spicy achar that came in handy during periods when the government would shut off the electrical grid without warning. “You need to know how to preserve your food when the lights go off,” he says. At Mango Bay, Chase serves a jerk chicken Caesar salad, grilled octopus with jerk gremolata, and a burger with jerk aioli. See photo above for Chase’s octopus with jerk seasoning.
