Previously translated texts can be converted into a translation memory even if not translated in any CAT tool. Both the original and the translated files are required and must have the same file format. The format must also be supported.
Note

Aligning .XLSX files that contain many columns with different content and metadata can cause segmentation issues. In this case, it is recommended to copy and paste content from the original Excel files into a single Excel file, and import the new file into a job as a multilingual Excel.

Single file pairs can be aligned or batches of files (in ZIP folders).

Files are imported and segmented. The content will then be aligned and inserted into an .XLSX file for download. The .XLSX file can then be opened in a spreadsheet application for review and if correct, uploaded as an addition to a TM or a new TM.


Recommendations for use:

    Create a separate translation memory for the aligned segments (Aligned TM is a suggested name). This helps distinguish between the segments originating from the alignment and the actual translation work.

    Ensure a review of the .XLSX is done in a spreadsheet application. Alignment results may not be perfect due to differences in content, incorrectly set segmentation, inconsistent formatting in the source and target files, etc..

    Help translators by adding the aligned .XLSX file as a reference to the project. If incorrect alignments are identified, they can be checked in the reference file.



In mid-February, residents of Castel di Guido, a village on the outskirts of Rome, notified police of unusual activity taking place nearby. Locals had spotted people digging at night, seemingly without authorization, a spokesperson for the Carabinieri Art Squad tells CNN’s Barbie Latza Nadeau. When authorities investigated the site, they realized that looters had used a backhoe to access an underground cavern protected by fencing. Archaeologists jumped into action to prevent further damage—and soon discovered a well-preserved set of ruins that may have been visited by Roman emperors.

“Thanks to the local report and prompt intervention, it was possible to identify part of a large, previously unknown imperial-period villa and uncover a splendid array of decorations,” Alessia Contino, an archaeologist with the Special Superintendency of Rome, says in a statement, per a translation by the Independent’s Vishwam Sankaran.

Emergency excavations revealed the ancient structure’s entrance hall, which featured a central impluvium, or marble basin at the center of the room, and a mosaic floor adorned with botanical and geometric designs. The atrium’s back wall was once decorated with a colorful fresco, but only the lower section of the artwork, rendered in red plaster, survives today.

Three of the four rooms surrounding the entrance hall still boast floor mosaics with a variety of patterns. One room has waterproof flooring that indicates that it may have been used for agricultural activities.

A highlight of the finds is a 31.5-inch-tall statue of a bearded man, perhaps Silvanus, the Roman god of the countryside, or Silenus, a rustic god of wine-making and drunkenness. According to a separate statement, the figure is dressed in a tunic, with a basket slung over his shoulder. He may have once held a small animal in his arm.

The lavish nature of the villa, which was probably built in the first half of the first century C.E., suggests that its owners were Roman aristocrats or even members of the imperial family. In ancient times, the area was home to Lorium, a village described by Encyclopedia Britannica as “a favorite haunt” of Marcus Aurelius, who ruled over the Roman Empire between 161 and 180. Marcus’ predecessor, Antoninus Pius, also spent time in Lorium, even building a villa there. Antoninus’ ancestors and extended family had lived in the vicinity for decades, settling there no later than 86.
